Hello and welcome to a audio dataset consisting of one single episode of a non-existent podcast. Or, it eh, I may append this to a podcast that I set up recently regarding my with my thoughts on speech tech and AI in particular. More AI and generative AI I would, I would say. But in any event, the purpose of this voice recording is actually to create a lengthy voice sample for a quick evaluation, a back of the envelope evaluation as they might say, for different speech to text models. And I'm doing this because I I thought I'd made a great breakthrough in my journey with speech tech. And that was succeeding in the elusive task of fine-tuning Whisper. Whisper is, and I'm going to just talk, I'm trying to mix up, I'm going to try a few different styles of speaking. I might whisper something at some points as well. And I'll go back to speaking loud in different parts. I'm going to sound really like a crazy person because I'm also going to try to speak at different pitches and cadences in order to really try to put a speech to text model through its paces, which is trying to make sense of "is this guy just rambling on incoherently in one long sentence?" Or "are these just actually a series of step standalone stepalone standalone sentences?" And how is it going to handle stepalone?! That's not a word! What happens when you use speech to text and you use a fake word and then you're like, wait, that's not actually, that word doesn't exist. How does AI handle that? And these and more are all the questions that I'm seeking to answer in this training data. Now, why did why was I trying to fine tune whisper? And what is Whisper? As I said, I'm going to try to record this at a couple of different levels of technicality - for folks who are in the normal world and not totally stuck down the rabbit hole of AI. Which I have to say is a really wonderful rabbit hole to be to be down. It's a really interesting area. And speech and voice tech is the aspect of it that I find actually most - I'm not sure I would say the most interesting because there's just so much that is fascinating in AI. But the most that I find the most personally transformative in terms of the impact that it's had on my daily work life and productivity and how I sort of work. And I am persevering hard with the task of trying to get a good solution working for Linux. Which if anyone actually does listen to this not just for the training data and for the actual content, this has sparked. I had, besides the fine tune not working, well that was the failure. I used Claude Code. Because one thinks these days that there is nothing short of solving, you know, the reason of life or something that Claude and agentic AI can't do. Which is not really the case. It does seem that way sometimes. But it fails a lot as well. And this is one of those instances where last week I put together an hour of voice training data: basically speaking just random things for three minutes. And it was actually kind of tedious because the texts were really weird. Some of them were it was like, it was AI generated. I tried before to read Sherlock Holmes for an hour and I just couldn't, I was so bored after 10 minutes that I was like, "okay, no, I'm just gonna have to find something else to read." So I used I created with AI Studio, vibe coded, a synthetic text generator, which actually I thought was probably a better way of doing it because it would give me more short samples with more varied content. So I was like, okay, give me a voice note. Like I'm recording an email. Give me a short story to read. Give me prose. So I came up with all these different things and I added a little timer to it so I could see how close I was to one hour. And I spent like an hour one afternoon or probably two hours by the time you do retakes and whatever because you want to. It gave me a source of truth which I'm not sure if that's the scientific way to approach this topic of gathering training data but I thought made sense. I have a lot of audio data from recording voice notes which I've also kind of used been experimenting with using for a different purpose. It's slightly different - annotating task types. It's more text classification experiment. Or well it's more than that actually I'm working on a voice app. So it's a prototype I guess is really more accurate. But you can do that and you can work backwards. You listen back to a voice note and you painfully go through one of those - transcribing where you start and stop and scrub around it and you fix the errors . But it's really really boring to do that. So I thought it would be less tedious in the long term if I just recorded the source of truth. So it gave me these three minute snippets. I recorded them and saved an MP3 and a TXT in the same folder and I created an hour of that data. So I was very hopeful - quitely, you know, a little bit hopeful - that I would be able that I could actually fine tune Whisper. I want to fine tune Whisper because when I got into voice tech last November my wife was in the US and I was alone at home. And when crazy people like me do really wild things like use voice to tech technology that was basically when I started doing it. I didn't feel like a crazy person speaking to myself. And my expectations weren't that high. I used speech tech now and again tried it out. I was like "it'd be really cool if you could just like speak into your computer." And whatever I tried out that had Linux support was just - it was not good, basically. And this blew me away from the first go. I mean it wasn't 100% accurate out of the box. And it took work. But it was good enough that there was a solid foundation. And it kind of passed that pivot point that it's actually worth doing this. You know, there's a point where it's. So like the transcript is you don't have to get 100% accuracy for it to be worth your time for speech to text to be a worthwhile addition to your productivity. But you do need to get above let's say I don't know 85%. If it's 60% or 50% you inevitably say "screw it I'll just type it."Because you end up missing errors in the transcript and it becomes actually worse. You end up in a worse position than you started with it. That's been my experience. So I was like "oh, this is actually really really good. Now how did that happen?" The answer is ASR, Whisper being open-sourced. and the transformer architecture if you want to go back to the to the underpinnings. Which really blows my mind. And it's on my list to read through that paper 'All You Need Is Attention' as attentively as can be done with my limited brain. Because it's super high-level stuff - super advanced stuff I mean. But that I think of all the things that are fascinating about the sudden rise and AI and the dramatic capabilities I find it fascinating that few people are like "hang on, you've got this thing that can speak to you like a chatbot - an LLM. Then you've got image generation. Okay, so firstly those two things on the surface have nothing in common. So like, "how are they ... how did THAT just happen all at the same time?" And then when you extend that further you're like Suno right. You can sing a song and AI will like come up with an instrumental. And then you've got Whisper. And then you're like "wait a second how did all this stuff like if it's all AI what's like, there has to be some commonality. Otherwise these are four these are totally different technologies on the surface of it and the transformer architecture is as far as I know the answer. And I can't even say I can't even pretend that I really understand what the transformer architecture means in depth. But I have scanned it. And as I said I want to print it and really kind of think over it's at some point. And I'll probably feel bad about myself I think! Because weren't those guys in their in their 20s like? That's crazy! I think I asked ChatGPT once "who were the? Who wrote that paper and how old were they when it was published in Arxiv?" And I was expecting like, I don't know. What do you what do you imagine? I personally imagine kind of like you know you have these breakthroughs during COVID and things like that where like these kind of really obscure scientists who are like in their 50s and they've just kind of been laboring in labs and wearily writing and publishing in kind of obscure academic publications and they finally like hit a big or win a Nobel Prize. And then they're household household names. So I that was kind of what I had in mind. That was the mental image I'd formed of the birth of Arxiv. Like, I wasn't expecting 20-somethings in San Francisco! Though I thought that was both very very funny, very cool, and actually kind of inspiring. It's nice to think that people who you know just you might put them in the kind of milieu or bubble or world that you are in or credibly in through you know the series of connections that are coming up with such literally world changing innovations. So that was I thought anyway that that was cool. Okay voice training data. How are we doing? We're about 10 minutes. And I'm still talking about voice technology! So Whisper was brilliant. And I was so excited that I was my first instinct was to like guess it's like "oh my gosh I have to get like a really good microphone for this." So I didn't go on a spending spree because I said I'm gonna have to just wait a month and see if I still use this." And it just kind of became it's become really part of my daily routine. Like, if I'm writing an email I'll record a voice note and then I'll develop it and it's nice to see that everyone is like developing the same things in parallel. Like, that's maybe kind of a weird thing to say. But when I look, I kind of came when I started working on this these prototypes on GitHub, which is where I just kind of share very freely and loosely ideas and you know first iterations on concepts. And for want of a better word I called it like "LLM post processing." Or cleanup. Or basically a system prompt that after you get back the raw text from Whisper, you run it through model and say "okay this is crappy text like add sentence structure and you know fix it up. " And now when I'm exploring the different tools that are out there that people have built, I see quite a number of projects have basically you know done the same thing. Lest that be misconstrued, I'm not saying for a millisecond that I inspired them. I'm sure this has been a thing that's been integrated into tools for a while. But it's, it's the kind of thing that when you start using these tools every day the need for it is almost instantly apparent. Because text that doesn't have any punctuation or paragraph spacing takes a long time to you know, it takes so long to get it into a presentable email that,again, it moves speech tech into that, before that inflection point where you're like "nah it's just not worth." It it's like it'll just be quicker to type this. So it's it's a big - it's a little touch that actually is a big deal So I was on Whisper and I've been using Whisper and I kind of early on find a couple of tools. I couldn't find what I was looking for on Linux which is basically just something that'll run in the background. You'll give it an API key and it'll just like transcribe. With like a little key to start and stop the dictation. And the issues wer I discovered that like most people involved in creating these projects were very much focused on local models. And running Whisper locally because you can. And I tried that a bunch of times and just never got results that were as good as the cloud. And when I began looking at the cost of the speech to text APIs and what I was spending just thought there it's actually in my opinion just one of the better deals in API spending and in cloud. Like, it's just not that expensive for very, very good models that are much more. You know, you're going to be able to run the full model, the latest model versus whatever you can run on your average GPU. Unless you want to buy a crazy GPU. It doesn't really make sense to me. Now, I privacy is another concern that I know is kind of like a very much a separate thing. That people just don't want their voice data and their voice leaving their local environment. Maybe for regulatory reasons as well. But I'm not in that. I'm don't really really care about people listening to my grocery list consisting of reminding myself that I need to buy more beer, Cheetos and hummus. Which is kind of the three three staples of my diet during periods of poor nutrition. But the kind of stuff that I transcribe most it's just not it's not a it's not a privacy thing. I'm not that sort of sensitive about. And I don't do anything so you know sensitive or secure that requires airgapping. So I looked at the pricing and especially the kind of older models mini. Some of them are very very affordable. And I did a back of the, I did a calculation once with ChatGPT and I was like "okay, this is the, this is the API price for I can't remember whatever the model was. Let's say I just go at it like nonstop which rarely happens. Probably I would say an average I might dictate 30 to 60 minutes per day if I was probably summing up the emails, documents, outlines. Which is a lot. But it's it's still a fairly modest amount. And I was like well some days I do go on like one or two days where I've been usually when I'm like kind of out of the house and just have something like I've nothing else to do. Like if I'm at a hospital. We have a newborn. And you're waiting for like hours and hours for an appointment. And I would probably have listened to podcasts before becoming a speech fanatic. And I'm like "oh wait let me just get down let me just get these ideas out of my head." And that's when I'll go on my speech binges. But those are like once every few months - like not frequently. But I said okay let's just say if I'm gonna price out cloud STT. If I was like dedicated every second of every waking hour to transcribing for some odd reason. I mean, I'd have to like eat and use the toilet! Like, you know there's only so many hours I'm awake for. So like let's just say a maximum of like 40 hour 45 minutes in the hours and I said all right let's just say 50. Who knows? You're dictating on the toilet! We do it! So you could just do 60. But whatever I did - and every day. Like you're going flat out, seven days a week dictating nonstop as like "what's my monthly API bill gonna be at this price?" And it came out to like 70 or 80 bucks. And I was like, well that would be an extraordinary amount of dictation! And I would hope that there was some compelling reason more worth more than 70 dollars that I embarked upon that. So given that that's kind of the max point for me I said that's actually very very affordable. Now you're gonna if you want to spec out the costs and you want to do the post processing that I really do feel is valuable that's gonna cost more as well. Unless you're using Gemini which needless to say as a random person sitting in Jerusalem I have no affiliation nor with Google nor Anthropic nor Gemini nor any major tech vendor for that matter. Um I like Gemini not so much as a everyday model. Um it's kind of underwhelmed in that respect I would say. But for multimodal I think it's got a lot to offer. And I think that the transcribing functionality whereby it can um process audio with the system prompt and both give you a transcription that's cleaned up - that reduces two steps to one. And that for me is a very very big deal. And uh I feel like even Google hasn't really sort of thought through how useful the that modality is and what kind of use cases uh you can achieve with it. Because I found in the course of this year just an endless list of really kind of system prompt system prompt stuff that I can say "okay I've used it to capture context data for AI which is literally I might speak for if I wanted to have a good bank of context data about who knows my childhood uh more realistically maybe my career goals something that would just be like really boring to type out so I'll just like sit in my car and record it for 10 minutes. And that 10 minutes you get a lot of information in um emails which is short text uh just there is a whole bunch. And all these workflows kind of require a little bit of treatment afterwards and different treatment. My context pipeline is kind of like just extract the bare essential. So you end up with me talking very loosely about sort of what I've done in my career, where I've worked, where I might like to work. And it goes - it condenses that down to very robotic language that is easy to chunk, parse, and maybe put into a vector database. "Daniel has worked in technology! Daniel is a has been working in marketing." Stuff like that. That's not how you would speak um but I figure it's probably easier to parse for, after all, robots. So we've almost got to 20 minutes. And this is actually a success because I wasted 20 minutes of my uh of the evening speaking into microphone and the levels were shot and it uh it was clipping. And I said I can't really do an evaluation. I have to be fair. I have to give the models a chance to do their thing. Uh what am I hoping to achieve in this? Okay my fine tune was a dud as mentioned. Deepgram STT - I'm really really hopeful that this prototype will work. And it's a build in public open source. So anyone is welcome to use it if I make anything good But what was really exciting for me last night when after hours of um trying my own prototypes, seeing someone just made something that works like that. You know, you're not going to have to build a custom Conda environment and image. I have AMD GPU which makes things much more complicated. I didn't find it And I was about to give up and I said "all right. Let me just give Deepgram's Linux thing a shot and if this doesn't work um I'm just going to go back to trying to vibe code something myself." And when I ran the script - I was using Claude Code to do the installation process - it ran the script and "oh my gosh, it works!" Just like that! Uh the tricky thing for all those ones who want to know all the nitty gritty details um was that I don't think it was actually struggling with transcription but pasting. Wayland makes life very hard. And I think there was something not running at the right time. Anyway, Deepgram - I looked at how they actually handled that because it worked out of the box when other stuff didn't. And it was quite a clever little mechanism and but more so than that the accuracy was brilliant. Now, what am I doing here? This is going to be a 20 minute audio uh sample and I'm I think I've done one or two of these before but I did it with short, snappy voice notes. This is kind of long form. This actually might be a better approximation for what's useful to me than voice memos like "I need to buy three liters of milk tomorrow and pita bread." Which is probably how like half my voice note voice notes sound. Like if anyone were to I don't know like find my phone they'd be like "this is the most boring person in the world!" Although actually there are some like kind of uh journaling thoughts as well. But it's a lot of content like that. And the probably for the evaluation the most useful thing is slightly obscure tech: Github, Nuclino, Hugging Face. Not so obscure that it's not going to have a chance of knowing it. But hopefully sufficiently well known that the models should get it. Uh I tried to do a little bit of speaking really fast and speaking very slowly. I would say in general I've spoken delivered this at a faster pace than I usually would owing to strong coffee flowing through my bloodstream. And the thing that I'm not going to get in this benchmark is background noise. Which in my first take that I had to get rid of my wife came in with my son for a good night kiss. And that actually would have been super helpful to get in because it was non-diarised. Or if we had diarisation a female I could say I want the male voice and that wasn't intended for transcription um. And we're not going to get background noise like people honking their horns. Which is something I've done in my main dataset where I am trying to go back to some of my voice notes, annotate them, and run a benchmark. But this is going to be just a pure quick test. And as someone I'm working on a voice note idea that's my sort of end motivation besides thinking it's an absolute outstanding technology that's coming to viability and really - I know this sounds cheesy - can actually have a very transformative effect. It's, you know, voice technology has been life changing for folks living with disabilities. And I think there's something really nice about the fact that it can also benefit you know folks who are able-bodied. And like we can all in different ways um make this tech as useful as possible regardless of the exact way that we're using it um. And I think there's something very powerful in that. And it can be very cool um I see huge potential. What excites me about voice tech - a lot of things actually. Firstly the fact that it's cheap and accurate as I mentioned at the very start of this um. And it's getting better and better with stuff like accent handling um. I'm not sure my my fine tune will actually ever come to fruition in the sense that I'll use it day to day as I imagine and get like superb flawless words error rates. Because I'm just kind of skeptical about local speech to tech as I mentioned. And I think the pace of innovation and improvement in the models. The main reasons for fine tuning from what I've seen have been people who are something that really blows blows my mind about ASR is the idea that it's inherently a-llingual. Or multilingual. Phonetic-based. So as folks who use speak very obscure languages that there may be there there might be a paucity of training data or almost none at all. And therefore the accuracy is significantly reduced. Or folks in very critical environments. I know there are this is used extensively in medical transcription and dispatcher work as um you know the call centers who send out ambulances etc where accuracy is absolutely paramount. And in the case of doctors, radiologists they might be using very specialized vocab all the time. So those are kind of the main two things. And I'm not sure that really just for trying to make it better on a few random tech words with my slightly. I mean, I have an accent! But like, not you know an accent that a few other million people have. Ish. I'm not sure that my little fine tune is going to actually like the bump in word error reduction if I ever actually figure out how to do it and get it up to the cloud. By the time we've done that I suspect that the next generation of ASR will just be so good that it will kind of be "nah, well, that would be cool if it worked out. But I'll just use this instead." So that's going to be it for today's episodes of voice training data single long shot evaluation. Who am I going to compare? Whisper is always good as a benchmark. But I'm more interested in seeing Whisper head-to-head with two things really. One is Whisper variants. So you've got these projects like Faster Whisper, Distilled Whisper. It's a bit confusing. There's a whole bunch of them. And the emerging ASRs which are also a thing. My intention for this is I'm not sure I'm going to have the time in any point of the foreseeable future to go back through this whole episode and create a proper source truth or I fix everything. I might do it if I can get one transcription that's sufficiently close to perfection. But what I would actually love to do on Hugging Face I think would be a great probably how I might visualize this is having the audio waveform play. And then have the transcript for each model below it. And maybe even a like you know to scale. And maybe even a local one as well like local Whisper versus Open AI API etc. And I can then actually listen back to segments. Or anyone who wants to can listen back to segments of this recording and see where a particular model struggled while others didn't, as well as the sort of headline finding of which had the best WER. But that would require the source of truth. Okay, that's it. Hope this was, I don't know, maybe useful for other folks interested in STT. You want to see - that I always feel think I've just said as something I didn't intend to. STT I said for those listening carefully! Including hopefully the models themselves! This has been myself Daniel Rosehill. For more um jumbled repositories about my uh roving interests in AI. But particularly agentic AI, MCP, and voice tech, you can find me on Github, Hugging Face. Where else? DanielRosehilll.com which is my personal website. As well as this podcast whose name I sadly cannot remember! Until next time, thanks for listening!